paṭhanto nāmāni pramadabharasindhau nipatitā:
smaranto rūpaṃ te varada kathayanto guṇakathā: |
caranto ye bhaktāstvayi khalu ramante paramamū-
nahaṃ dhanyān manye samadhigatasarvābhilaṣitān ||1||
paṭhanta:	repeating
nāmāni	(Thy) names
pramadabhara sindhau	in the ocean of Bliss
nipatitā:	submerged
smaranta:	meditating on
rūpaṃ te	Thy form
varada	O Bestower of boons!
kathayanta:	narrating (to one another)
guṇakathā:	(Thy) deeds and excellences
caranta:	moving about freely
ye bhaktā:	those devotees (who)
tvayi khalu ramante paraṃ	in Thee, indeed, immersed in the Supreme Bliss
amūn ahaṃ	such (devotees) I
dhanyān manye	consider to be really blessed
samadhigata-sarva-abhilaṣitān	(they who) have attained fulfilment of all desires (i.e. who have no other desire other than the Lord)
O Bestower of Boons! I consider those devotees of Thine most fortunate, who always chant Thy sacred names, and so revel in the ocean of Bliss. Contemplating on Thy divine form they are engaged in narrating Thy divine stories. Moving about freely, they are immersed in the joy of Thy thoughts. They, indeed, have fulfilled all their desires in life.
gadakliṣṭaṃ kaṣṭaṃ tava caraṇasevārasabhare'-
pyanāsaktaṃ cittaṃ bhavati bata viṣṇo kuru dayām |
bhavatpādāmbhojasmaraṇarasiko nāmanivahā-
nahaṃ gāyaṃ gāyaṃ kuhacana vivatsyāmi vijane ||2||
gada kliṣṭaṃ	by diseases tormented
kaṣṭaṃ	what a pity
tava caraṇa	Thy feet
sevā-rasa-bhare api	even for the intense joy of serving
anāsaktaṃ cittaṃ bhavati	my mind does not feel interested
bata	alas
viṣṇo	O All-pervading Being!
kuru dayāṃ	be merciful (to me)
bhavat-pāda-ambhoja-smaraṇa-rasika:	(I) becoming immersed in worshipping Thy lotus feet
nāma-nivahān-ahaṃ gāyaṃ gāyaṃ	I will keep singing Thy countless names
kuhacana vivatsyāmi vijane	in some secluded place, (I) will dwell
O Lord Vishnu! tormented by this painful disease, what a pity, my mind is not inclined to revel in the joy of worshipping at Thy lotus feet. Be merciful to me, so that I may retire to a secluded beautiful place and enjoy the bliss of meditating on Thy lotus feet immersed in chanting Thy innumerable names.
kṛpā te jātā cetkimiva na hi labhyaṃ tanubhṛtāṃ
madīyakleśaughapraśamanadaśā nāma kiyatī |
na ke ke loke'sminnaniśamayi śokābhirahitā
bhavadbhaktā muktā: sukhagatimasaktā vidadhate ||3||
kṛpā te jātā cet-	if Thy grace is achieved
kim-iva na hi labhyaṃ	what is there that cannot be achieved?
tanubhṛtāṃ	by all embodied beings
madīya kleśa-augha-praśamana-daśā	the task of eradicating my afflictions
nāma kiyatī	how insignificant it is
na ke ke loke-asmin-	are there not several (devotees) in this world
aniśam-ayi śoka-abhirahitā:	always, O Lord, who are free of sorrows
bhavat bhaktā:	Thy devotees
muktā:	who are liberated
sukha-gatim-asaktā	have pure bliss and are unattached
vidadhate	and also moving about freely
O Lord! if Thy grace is present, is there anything in this world which man cannot attain? The curing of my disease is just a very insignificant matter for Thee. There are many devotees of Thine, in this world, who having been liberated from sufferings and are moving about freely without any attachment.
muniprauḍhā rūḍhā jagati khalu gūḍhātmagatayo
bhavatpādāmbhojasmaraṇavirujo nāradamukhā: |
carantīśa svairaṃ satataparinirbhātaparaci -
tsadānandādvaitaprasaraparimagnā: kimaparam ||4||
muni prauḍhā	great sages
rūḍhā: jagati khalu	(who)are well known in the world, indeed
gūḍhātmagataya:	move about freely unnoticed
bhavat-pāda-ambhoja-smaraṇaviruja:	by constant contemplation of Thy lotus feet have become free from all sorrows
nārada-mukhā:	Naarada leading
caranti-īśa svairaṃ	move about, O Lord, at will
satata-parinirbhāta-	being ever immersed
paracit-ānand-advaita-prasara-parimagnā:	in the unabating and indivisible flow of Bliss-Consciousness
kim aparam	what more than this (is desirable in life?)
O Lord! Great sages like Naarada move about freely at will without being noticed. They are free of all sorrows because of their constant contemplation on Thy lotus feet. They have attained the eternal knowledge and are always immersed in Thy non-dual Self,which is of the nature of supreme Bliss-Consciousness. What more can one desire to attain in life?
bhavadbhakti: sphītā bhavatu mama saiva praśamaye-
daśeṣakleśaughaṃ na khalu hṛdi sandehakaṇikā |
na cedvyāsasyoktistava ca vacanaṃ naigamavaco
bhavenmithyā rathyāpuruṣavacanaprāyamakhilam ||5||
bhavat bhakti:	devotion to Thee
sphītā bhavatu	may it reach perfection
mama	my (devotion to Thee)
sa eva praśamayet	that alone will eradicate
aśeṣa-kleśa-aughaṃ	endless sorrows and sufferings
na khalu hṛdi	not, indeed, in my heart
sandeha kaṇikā	is there the slightest doubt
na cet	if it were not so
vyāsasya-ukti	the words of Sage Vyaasa
tava ca vacanaṃ	Thy own words
naigama-vaca:	(and) the statements of the Vedas
bhavet-mithyā	would become untrue
rathyā-puruṣa-vacana-prāyam	like the street urchins' casual utterings
akhilam	all of them
O Lord! May my devotion to Thee grow intense, so that all my sufferings may automatically subside. I do not have the slightest doubt in my heart that devotion to Thee will bear this fruit. For if it were not so, the words of sage Vyaasa, Thy own words and the declarations of the Vedaas would prove to be untrue, like the casual mutterings of street urchins.
bhavadbhaktistāvat pramukhamadhurā tvat guṇarasāt
kimapyārūḍhā cedakhilaparitāpapraśamanī |
punaścānte svānte vimalaparibodhodayamila-
nmahānandādvaitaṃ diśati kimata: prārthyamaparam ||6||
bhavat-bhakti: - tāvat	devotion to Thee, indeed
pramukha-madhurā	in the beginning itself is sweet
tvat-guṇa-rasāt	because of Thy excellent attributes
kim-api-ārūḍhā cet-	even with a little progress
akhila-paritāpa-praśamanī	it destroys all sorrows completely
puna:-ca-ante	and besides, at the end also
sva-ante	in the mind
vimala-paribodha-udaya-milat	arising from the pure knowledge of identity
mahā-ānanda-advaitaṃ	(with Brahman),the non-dual supreme bliss
diśati	(It i.e. devotion) confers
kim-ata: prārthyam-aparam	other than this what is there to seek
O Lord! devotion to Thee is sweet right from the beginning because of Thy glorious attributes. When such devotion becomes intense, it removes all sorrows of the devotee. At the final stage of devotion, the devotee experiences pure absolute Bliss coupled with knowledge of the Self. What more is there for one to seek?
vidhūya kleśānme kuru caraṇayugmaṃ dhṛtarasaṃ
bhavatkṣetraprāptau karamapi ca te pūjanavidhau |
bhavanmūrtyāloke nayanamatha te pādatulasī-
parighrāṇe ghrāṇaṃ śravaṇamapi te cārucarite ||7||
vidhūya kleśān-me	removing all my sufferings
kuru	(please) conduct in such manner (that)
caraṇa-yugmam	(my) pair of feet
dhṛta-rasam	(may) be delighted
bhavat-kṣetra-prāptau	in reaching Thy temple
karam-api ca	and my hands
te pūjana-vidhau	in worshipping Thee with rituals
bhavat-mūrti-āloke	thy(auspicious) form, in seeing
nayanam-	(my) eyes
atha te pādatulasī-parighrāṇe	then, at Thy feet the offered tulsi fragrance, in smelling
ghrāṇam	(my) nose
śravaṇam-api	and also my ears
te cāru-carite	(in hearing) Thy charming deeds and excellences
O Lord! Be graceful to remove all my afflictions so that my two feet will take delight in reaching Thy temple, my hands in performing worship to Thee,my eyes in seeing Thy enchanting form, my nose in enjoying the fragrance of the Tulsi leaves offered at Thy feet and my ears in hearing the stories of Thy glories and great deeds.
prabhūtādhivyādhiprasabhacalite māmakahṛdi
tvadīyaṃ tadrūpaṃ paramasukhacidrūpamudiyāt |
udañcadromāñco galitabahuharṣāśrunivaho
yathā vismaryāsaṃ durupaśamapīḍāparibhavān ||8||
prabhūta-ādhi-vyādhi-prasabha-calite	troubled by the incessant mental and physical sufferings
māmaka-hṛdi	in my mind
tvadīyaṃ tat-rūpaṃ parama-sukha-cit-rūpam-	Thy that form which is of the nature of Supreme Bliss Consciousness
udiyāt	may it manifest itself
udañcta-romāñca:	(with) exciting horripilation
galita-bahu-harṣa-aśru-nivaha:	with tears of joy (of ecstasy) flowing profusely
yathā vismaryāsaṃ	so that I may forget completely (without effort)
durupaśama-pīḍā-paribhavān	all (my) endless woes caused by incurable ailments
O Lord! In my mind, which is now very agitated due to mental and physical afflictions, may Thy beautiful form manifest, which is of the nature of Knowledge-Bliss absolute. This will excite me with supreme devotion causing horripilation all over the body and tears flowing in ecstasy and in such a thrill, my endless sorrows will melt into insignificance.
marudgehādhīśa tvayi khalu parāñco'pi sukhino
bhavatsnehī so'haṃ subahu paritapye ca kimidam |
akīrtiste mā bhūdvarada gadabhāraṃ praśamayan
bhavat bhaktottaṃsaṃ jhaṭiti kuru māṃ kaṃsadamana ||9||
marut-geha-adhīśa	O Lord of Guruvayur
tvayi khalu parāñca:-api sukhinaḥ	in Thee, even those who are indifferent are (living) happily
bhavat-snehī sa:-ahaṃ	(whereas) a devotee of Thine like me
subahu paritapye ca	(am) suffering too much
kima-idam	what is this! (how come)
akīrti:-te mā bhūt	let no disrepute come to Thee (because of this anomaly)
varada	O Bestower of boons!
gadabhāraṃ praśamayan	eradicate (my) afflictions
bhavat-bhakta-uttaṃsaṃ	(make me) the best of Thy devotees
jhaṭiti kuru māṃ	quickly make me
kaṃsadamana	O Slayer of Kamsa!
O Lord of Guruvaayur! I find that even those who are indifferent to Thee are leading a happy life. O Bestower of boons! Even though I am an ardent devotee of Thine, I am undergoing various sufferings. Why is this so? O Lord! Will this not bring disrepute to Thee? Hence, O slayer of Kamsa! Kindly eradicate my diseases and soon make me one of your foremost devotees.
kimuktairbhūyobhistava hi karuṇā yāvadudiyā-
dahaṃ tāvaddeva prahitavividhārtapralapitaḥ |
puraḥ klṛpte pāde varada tava neṣyāmi divasā-
nyathāśakti vyaktaṃ natinutiniṣevā viracayan ||10||
kim-uktai: - bhūyobhiḥ-	what is the use of mere talking again and again
tava hi karuṇā	Thy compassion, indeed
yāvat-udiyāt-	till (it) arises (descends)
ahaṃ tāvat-	till then I
deva	O Lord!
prahita-vividha-ārta-pralapitaḥ	(I will be) giving up lamentations of all kinds
puraḥ klṛpte pāde	At (Thy) feet which are in front of me
varada tava	O Bestower of Boons! (at) Thy (feet)
neṣyāmi divasān-	I shall spend my days
yathāśakti	to the best of my ability
vyaktaṃ	obviously (certainly)
nati-nuti-niṣevā	prostrating, singing Thy praises and worshipping (Thee)
viracayan	performing (Thy worship)
O Lord! What is the use of my mere prattling? O Bestower of boons! I have resolved that till Thy Grace descends on me, giving up all my lamentations, I shall do prostration at Thy holy feet which are in front of me, sing Thy glories and do service to Thee as best as I can. Thus worship Thee.